# 1. Problem Statement
Design a URL shortening service that converts long URLs into compact, shareable URLs and redirects users to the original destination with low latency and high availability.
---

# 2. Functional Requirements
  Users can create a short code or short url for a given url.
  Users are redirected to actual urls when given a short code url.
  configurable expiration
  optional custom alias
---

# 3. Non-Functional Requirements
  - low latency 100ms redirect
  - high throughout for read/redirect
  - Highly available
  - Read heavy system
  - Durable storage
  - Eventual consistency Acceptable
  - Low infrastructure cost
  - Logging/tracings
  - Fault tolerant
---

# 4. Out of Scope
- Analytics
- Admin Dashboard
- Billing
- Notifications
- configurable expiration
- optional custom alias

---

# 5. Assumptions
- Read-heavy
- Internet available

---

# 6. Capacity Estimation
As we would more reads on get short url our system would be 1:10 read:write qps.

Reads/day = 100M reads approx(1.2k rps) avg peak (3.6k)
Writes/day = 10M reads (120) peak(360) rps
Storage we store (long url, short url, expiry timestamp, id) assuming 1kb per record (10GB date for 10M), Postgresql.
Record Size approx 1bg
Growth/day - 1GB
Growth/year = 365GB
Bandwidth - 10MB/s, as we will have at most 360 requests as per the peak time.
Average request - not sure what to add here
Average response - not sure what to add here
Memory
Cache Size  As we know it is a reaedy heavy system always hitting the db for a same url which was already read would make the db a bottle neck, Hotspot zone indeed in sometime. Frequently accessed short code will be the hot data.

---

# 7. API Design
  ***POST /shorten***

  A  rest endpoint Creates a record of the data url in the database with columns as mentioned.
  We don't think this needs to idempotent. The response is not very huge to have pagination.
Request
```json
{
  "url":"http://long-domain-name.com/url-longest-in-the-world",
  "aliasName":"http://long-domain-name.com/url-longest-in-the-world" //optional for mvp or pahse 1
}```

```json{
  "shortCode":"http://shorten-code"
}```
status: 201

Errors
  Invalid url
  short code generation failed internally
  short code already exists for alias based short code

***GET /{url}***

A  rest endpoint reads the actual url mapped against the shortcode provided in the path parameters and redirects user to the url read.
Request - NA
Response - NA
status: 301 reedirect to scheme and url mapped for short-code

Errors
short code not found in system 404
---

# 8. Data Model
We only have one entity to save or persist now.
- PRIMARY KEY(id)
- UNIQUE(shortCode)
- INDEX(expiry)
- TEXT(url)

# 9. Read Flow

Client
↓
Load Balancer
↓
Application
↓
Cache
↓
Database

Implement a cache aside strategy to solve the database from being a hotspot
When a request to read comes to the load balancer and it reaches application, It will try to read the record from cache, it exists the response is returned to the client as success with long url.
If it doesn't, read the record from the db.Update cache for the record. Return the response as success.
If the record not found in db then a 404 is returned.

---

# 10. Write Flow

Client
↓
Application
↓
Validation (happens in the application)
↓
Database
↓
Cache
↓
Response

On recieving the request validate the url is valid, we can't ensure availability but the format of url can be validated.
Allow multiple same long urls but different short code mapped against it.This write is not idempotent.
Generate the short-code
Approach 1: Hash the long url and store the hash as a shortcode. Hashing doesn't really make the url short the hash itself is long.
cutting down the hash we will reduce the length to n, increases the collision. so before saving the short against any url should be validated if it already given to some other url.
if its already taken regenerate until we find a unique short code. also convert shortcode to base62 to reduce the size and also avoid having =,/,? as they are special characters in a url. or use url-base-64 encoding.

Approach 2: 
 Using snowflake mechanism, which is unqiue 64-bit id , mix of timestamp, machine id which is local sequence would be unqiue.

Approach 3:
Decide another mechanism generating a fixed length of a series of base62 strings from 00000000 to zzzzzz, so whenever a new url request comes we just assign it not next short code rather than worrying of collision.

For aliases Always check whether it was already taken before storing the alias shortcode against the url.

# 11. High-Level Design
Client
↓
Gateway/Load balancer
↓
application
↓
cache
↓
Storage(database)

# 12. Scaling

Question

How do I remove ONE bottleneck?

Today we had the database as a heavy bottleneck (hot spot for reading queries).
1. Database become hotspot for 100M reads/Day as mentioned with cache-aside strategy.
  Introduced redis cache which stores the copy the same database record with a ttl. So every 100 queries, 10 go to database for cache miss.
  Using postgresql for our storage, as we have structed dataset, which requires concurrent writes and read operations with high availability.


2. When the reads increased from 1B/day the redis is performing well, database queries are performing fine. Find the request is spending more time in application to store the traces and analytics. Introduce kafka to store analytics asynchronous as its not required for users.

3. Writes increased from 1M/day to 10M/day won't have much impact on our achitecture as it just 120 writes/sec postgresql can handle that. If write go to 2000 writes/sec understand where the write is taking time at the connection pooling, write latency. Introduce read and write replicas Even now if the latency doesn't reduce introduce partitioning the database based short code or id.


Possible solutions

□ Load Balancer

□ Read Replica

□ Partitioning

□ Sharding

□ Cache

□ CDN

□ Queue

□ Async Processing

Never add technology without identifying the bottleneck first.

---

# 13. Failure Modes

This is the most important section.

For EVERY component ask

> What if this component disappears?

Component

↓

What breaks?

↓

Can users continue?

↓

How do we recover?

Checklist

□ Client

□ DNS

□ Load Balancer

□ API Server

□ Cache

□ Database

□ Queue

□ External APIs

□ Object Storage

□ CDN

Examples

Redis down

↓

Fallback to DB

↓

Higher latency

↓

Alert

Database down

↓

Failover

↓

Read Replica

↓

503

Queue down

↓

Retry

↓

DLQ

↓

Alert

---

# 14. Trade-offs

Every major decision must answer

WHY?

Questions

Why PostgreSQL?

Why not MongoDB?

Why Redis?

Why not Memcached?

Why Kafka?

Why RabbitMQ?

Why UUID?

Why Base62?

Why Cache Aside?

Why Write Through?

If you cannot answer WHY,

you probably don't understand the decision yet.

---

# 15. Security

Checklist

□ Authentication

□ Authorization

□ Rate Limiting

□ Encryption

□ Secret Management

□ Input Validation

□ SQL Injection

□ XSS

□ CSRF

□ Abuse Prevention

---

# 16. Monitoring

How do I know production is healthy?

Metrics

Logs

Tracing

Dashboards

Alerts

SLIs

SLOs

---

# 17. Future Improvements

If I had another month,

what would I build?

Examples

Analytics

Multi-region

Premium Features

AI

CDN

Notifications

---

# 18. Reflection (MOST IMPORTANT)

What assumptions did I make?

What trade-offs did I discover?

What mistakes did I make?

What did I learn?

What would I redesign next time?

---

# Engineering Rules

Rule 1

Understand the problem before designing.

---

Rule 2

Separate requirements from solutions.

---

Rule 3

Don't optimize imaginary bottlenecks.

---

Rule 4

Every architecture decision deserves a WHY.

---

Rule 5

Every component can fail.

Always ask

"What happens if this disappears?"

---

Rule 6

Build Version 1 first.

Scale later.

---

Rule 7

Simple beats clever.

---

Rule 8

Think first.

Sketch second.

Document last.
